Information visualisation

Title = Framing Data
Description = Telling your story through data, needs some core ideas and thinking about story and data. Explore these concepts how they work together.
Tags = "Background knowledge” story data visualisation 
Relevance = Familiarising of core principles and background knowledge behind Data visualisation. 

Content =
 Title = 18 min TedEd video about data visualisation.
 Media Title = The beauty of data visualisation - David mcCandle
 Media source = https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Zg-C8AAIGg



Content =

At its essence, a story is an ordered sequence of steps, 
each of which can contain words, images, visualizations, 
video, or any combination thereof. Here, we focus on 
stories that primarily consist of visualization steps, which 
can include text and images but essentially are based on 
data

As a starting point, we propose the concept of 
storytelling affordances—features of a visualization that 
provide a narrative structure and guide the reader through 
a story. A fundamental feature of stories is that they 
provide a temporal structure, even if it is not necessarily 
linear. Time is closely related to causality, so providing 
the causal relationships between facts and events ties the 
individual parts together in a cohesive structure.

Interaction is one of the most important aspects of 
visualization. The ability not only to see the data but also 
to quickly change the view, add different data, and so 
on makes analyzing it much faster and more effective. 
Stories are traditionally told without interaction, and 
unlike analysis processes, are predefined and meant to 
be delivered in their entirety.
Among the attempts at interactive storytelling, computer 
games are perhaps the most interesting and certainly the 
most popular. However, it is debatable whether games are 
stories and not just worlds that the player can explore, 
similar to traditional data exploration or analysis.
Clearly, there are uses for interaction in visualization 
stories that do not interfere with the story arc. At the 
very least, opening up a visualization for interaction at 
the story’s end provides a convenient starting point for 
exploration and goes beyond a simple slideshow. Pausing 
the story for interaction is another easy-to-imagine 
scenario, particularly in response to questions from the 
audience when using visualization in a live presentation


Techniques specific to storytelling
Any visualization can be used as part of a story, but 
some techniques lend themselves to storytelling better 
than others. For example, techniques such as the 
connected scatterplot, in which the points are connected 
with a line in some order, or the slope graph, essentially 
a single-axis pair from parallel coordinates, generally are 
not very useful for analysis. However, they can be quite 
effective as storytelling devices for specific data. How well 
they work depends not only on the data structure but also 
on actual values. If the connected scatterplot results in 
a large number of tangled lines, it does not provide any 
value, but if the values change relatively smoothly and 
Opening up a visualization for interaction 
at the story’s end provides a convenient 
starting point for exploration and goes 
beyond a simple slideshow. 50 computer
Cover Feature
in slightly unexpected ways, the scatterplot provides the 
starting point for a story.
We are not aware of a systematic study of visualization 
techniques for their effectiveness as storytelling devices. 
Such studies could give a better understanding of the 
design space for visualization techniques that are useful 
in storytelling.


Stories and collaboration
Storytelling is an inherently collaborative activity: there 
is no point in creating a story if there is no audience. Little 
research has been done on collaboration in visualization, 
and storytelling could provide an interesting starting point 
for more work in this area. As the small-group presentation 
scenario demonstrates, stories naturally lead to questions, 
which lead to discussions, which lead to deeper analysis.
In addition to being a good way to present data, stories 
also offer an effective means of packaging information 
and knowledge in a way that is easy for another person 
to understand. Perhaps visual data stories will become 
the way to preserve information about complex data 
and processes and pass on knowledge in the future—not 
unlike they once were, before reading and writing became 
common skills.

Content source = http://www.computer.org.proxy.uba.uva.nl:2048/csdl/mags/co/2013/05/mco2013050044.pdf
Storytelling: The Next Step for Visualization
Robert Kosara and Jock Mackinlay, Tableau Software, Seattle

Content =

Recap
An excellent visualization, according to Edward Tufte, expresses “complex ideas communicated with clarity, precision and efficiency.” I would add that an excellent visualization also tells a story through the graphical depiction of statistical information. As I discussed in an earlier post, visualization in its educational or confirmational role is really a dynamic form of persuasion. Few forms of communication are as persuasive as a compelling narrative. To this end, the visualization needs to tell a story to the audience. Storytelling helps the viewer gain insight from the data. (For a great example, how much do you think steroids have influenced baseball?)

	1.	Find the compelling narrative. Along with giving an account of the facts and establishing the connections between them, don’t be boring. You are competing for the viewer’s time and attention, so make sure the narrative has a hook, momentum, or a captivating purpose. Finding the narrative structure will help you decide whether you actually have a story to tell. If you don’t, then perhaps this visualization should support exploratory data analysis (EDA) rather than convey information. However, for the designer of an exploratory visualization it is still important to spark the viewers’ imagination to encourage examining relationships among and facilitate interactingwith the data – think gameification.
	2.	Be objective and offer balance. A visualization should be devoid of bias. Even if it is arguing to influence, it should be based upon what the data says–not what you want it to say. Tufte found numerous charts that misled viewers about the underlying data, and created a formula to quantify such a misleading graphic called the “Lie Factor.” The Lie Factor is equivalent to the size of the effect shown in the graphic, divided by the size of the effect in the data. Sometimes it is unintentional-a number that is three times bigger than another will be perceived nine times bigger if represented in 3D. There are simple ways to encourage objectivity: labeling to avoid ambiguity, have graphic dimensions match data dimensions, using standardized units, and keeping design elements from compromising the data. Balance can come from alternative representations (multiple clustering’s; confidence intervals instead of lines; changing timelines; alternative color palettes and assignments; variable scaling) of the data in the same visualization. Maintaining objectivity and balance is not a trivial effort and is easily unintentionally violated. Viewers and decision makers will eventually sniff out inconsistencies which in turn will cause the designer to lose trust and credibility, no matter how good the story.
	3.	Don’t Censor. Don’t be selective about the data you include or exclude, unless you’re confident you’re giving your audience the best representation of what the data “says”. This selectivity includes using discrete values when the data is continuous; how you deal with missing, outlier and out of range values; arbitrary temporal ranges; capped values, volumes, ranges, and intervals. Viewers will eventually figure that out and lose trust in the visualization (and any others you might produce).
	4.	Finally, Edit, Edit, Edit. Also, take care to really try to explain the data, not just decorate it. Don’t fall into “it looks cool” trap, when it might not be the best way explain the data. As journalists and writers know, if you are spending more time editing and improving your visualization than creating it, you are probably doing something right.


conent source = Jim Stikeleather  |   11:00 AM April 24, 2013
http://blogs.hbr.org/2013/04/how-to-tell-a-story-with-data/


Extra learning =
Title = 
description =
link =
http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog

Title = 
description =
link =
http://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/articles/tell-meaningful-stories-with-data.html

Related = Links to cards about story 

Suggested next card = Getting started with your project (example)
